So what I'd like to do is to run some code that's going to allocate
some memory and then take the address of that memory in Java and
print out the address of the memory.
And the idea behind this is that as we print these addresses,
we'll see that the memory address rises as we allocate more
and more objects. And then eventually, the garbage collector will run and,
at that point, will collect all the memory.
The next allocation will go back to the same address as the previous
allocation or close to the previous allocation at least.
We have some code here.
Let me run this first, and then I'll take you through the code.
So the application is called Sawtooth.
It's very simple.
We're going to run this with a classpath.
And if I run this code, we just see it prints out a large stream of numbers.
And at the moment, just by looking at those numbers, we can't see too much.
But those numbers are the addresses of the objects as they are being allocated.
So let me kill that.
If I come back into the code, we can see how this is going to work.
So we're allocating an object called GCMe.
And GCMe is defined here.
GCMe is simply a large object.
There's many longs in here. In fact,
there are 18 of them. So that makes this quite a large object. And
the reason for that is that when we allocate this, if it was a
small object, we need to allocate many,
many thousands of them before the garbage collector kicked
in. As it's larger, we need to allocate fewer objects before
the garbage collector kicks in.
So if I look at the code that allocates the objects,
you'll see there's a loop. Inside the loop, we allocate a new object,
GCMe. We take the address of the object, you'll see how we do that in
a moment, and then simply print out that address. To take the address
of the object, we have a helper method called addressOf that just gets
given an object.
And this helper uses the Unsafe class.
Now Unsafe is part of sun.misc.Unsafe.
This is not a standard part of the Java runtime.
It's an undocumented class,
but you'll find this used quite often, and it's quite possible that this
class will be included officially in the Java 9 runtime.
There are many websites out there that tell us how to use Unsafe.
But essentially, we have to get a reference to a singleton class.
We can't do that directly as the class is a private
constructor, and there's also security checks in place to
stop us creating instances of this class.
Once we have a reference to the class,
we can then use it to get the address of an object.
And here we're just seeing if the address size is 4 or 8, so I'll be
running on the 32‑bit environment or 64‑bit environment and then using
either getInt to get the address or getLong to get the address. And we
simply return that address.
So that's all the code is doing.
So if we run this code again,
we'll see the same output, again not very interesting. But what I'd
like to do is to run this code and capture that output to a file.
And we'll give this file a CSV extension so it'll act like a
comma‑separated variable file.
So I'll just call this out.csv.
Once that file has being created,
we can check the contents by using cat on out.csv, and that displays the same
date as we saw being printed to the console. Again, not very exciting.
However, what we can do is load that data into Excel.
So in Excel, if we open up out.csv, again, all we see is a column of numbers.
Now what we can do is if I highlight that column and insert a line graph,
so I go to Graphs, Line, and that'll take that data.
And as we can see,
we got a sawtooth graph. And what this is showing is that we
start allocating memory at a certain place inside the
address space. We keep allocating, allocating,
allocating, allocating.
Eventually, we'll try and allocate some memory.
We'll have no more space to allocate it.
The garbage collector will kick in, that will free up the memory, and the
next time we allocate memory is at some lower location inside the address
space. And again, we run through the same process.
We keep allocating until the garbage collector kicks in.
And then when that happens,
we run again, the GC runs, and we allocate the next piece of
memory at the lowest point inside the address space, and off we go
again. So hopefully this illustrates very simply what the GC is
doing inside this application.
We'll see later in this course that a far more sophisticated tool is out
there for showing the garbage collector, but this is a nice, simple approach for showing what's happening.